# std::linear_congruential_engine

```cpp
template<
    class UIntType,
    UIntType a,
    UIntType c,
    UIntType m
> class linear_congruential_engine;  // (since C++11)
```

`linear_congruential_engine` is a random number engine based on Linear
congruential generator (LCG). A LCG has a state that consists of a single
integer.

The transition algorithm of the LCG function is \(\small{x_{i+1}\leftarrow(a x_i
+ c)\mod m}\)xi+1 ← (axi+c) mod m.

The following typedefs define the random number engine with two commonly used
parameter sets:

- **`minstd_rand0` (C++11)** —
  `std::linear_congruential_engine<std::uint_fast32_t, 16807, 0, 2147483647>`
  Discovered in 1969 by Lewis, Goodman and Miller, adopted as "Minimal standard"
  in 1988 by Park and Miller
- **`minstd_rand` (C++11)** —
  `std::linear_congruential_engine<std::uint_fast32_t, 48271, 0, 2147483647>`
  Newer "Minimum standard", recommended by Park, Miller, and Stockmeyer in 1993

### Template parameters

- **UIntType** — The result type generated by the generator. The effect is
  undefined if this is not one of `unsigned short`, `unsigned int`, `unsigned
  long`, or `unsigned long long`.
- **a** — the multiplier term
- **c** — the increment term
- **m** — the modulus term

### Member types

- **`result_type` (C++11)** — The integral type generated by the engine. Results
  are undefined if this is not an unsigned integral type.

### Member functions

**Construction and Seeding**

- **(constructor) (C++11)** — constructs the engine (public member function)
- **seed (C++11)** — sets the current state of the engine (public member
  function)

**Generation**

- **operator() (C++11)** — advances the engine's state and returns the generated
  value (public member function)
- **discard (C++11)** — advances the engine's state by a specified amount
  (public member function)

**Characteristics**

- **min [static] (C++11)** — gets the smallest possible value in the output
  range (public static member function)
- **max [static] (C++11)** — gets the largest possible value in the output range
  (public static member function)

### Non-member functions

- **operator==operator!= (C++11)(C++11)(removed in C++20)** — compares the
  internal states of two pseudo-random number engines (function)
- **operator<<operator>> (C++11)** — performs stream input and output on
  pseudo-random number engine (function template)

### Member constants

- **constexpr UIntType multiplier [static] (C++11)** — the multiplier term (a).
  (public static member constant)
- **constexpr UIntType increment [static] (C++11)** — the increment term (c).
  (public static member constant)
- **constexpr UIntType modulus [static] (C++11)** — the modulus term (m).
  (public static member constant)
- **constexpr UIntType default_seed [static] (C++11)** — the default seed (`1`).
  (public static member constant)

### Example

---
*Source: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/random/linear_congruential_engine*
