# Destructors

A destructor is a special member function that is called when the lifetime of an
object ends. The purpose of the destructor is to free the resources that the
object may have acquired during its lifetime.

A destructor must not be a coroutine.
*(since C++20)*

### Syntax

```text
~ class-name ();    (1)
virtual ~ class-name ();    (2)
decl-specifier-seq ﻿(optional) ~ class-name () = default;    (3)    (since C++11)
decl-specifier-seq ﻿(optional) ~ class-name () = delete;    (4)    (since C++11)
attr ﻿(optional) decl-specifier-seq ﻿(optional) id-expression ( void(optional) )except ﻿(optional) attr ﻿(optional) requires-clause ﻿(optional);    (5)
```

1) Typical declaration of a prospective(since C++20) destructor.

2) Virtual destructor is usually required in a base class.

3) Forcing a destructor to be generated by the compiler.

4) Disabling the implicit destructor.

5) Formal syntax of a prospective(since C++20) destructor declaration.

- **decl-specifier-seq** — friend, inline, virtual, `constexpr`,
  `consteval`(since C++20)
- **id-expression** — within a class definition, the symbol `~` followed by the
  class-name. Within a class template, the symbol `~` followed by the name of
  the current instantiation of the template. At namespace scope or in a friend
  declaration within a different class, *nested-name-specifier* followed by the
  symbol `~` followed by the class-name which is the same class as the one named
  by the nested-name-specifier. In any case, the name must be the actual name of
  the class or template, and not a typedef. The entire id-expression may be
  surrounded by parentheses which do not change its meaning.
- **attr** — (since C++11) sequence of any number of attributes
- **except** — exception specification as in any function declaration If no
  exception specification is explicitly provided, the exception specification is
  considered to be one that would be used by the implicitly-declared destructor
  (see below). In most cases, this is `noexcept(true)`. Thus a throwing
  destructor must be explicitly declared `noexcept(false)`. (since C++11)
- **If no exception specification is explicitly provided, the exception
  specification is considered to be one that would be used by the
  implicitly-declared destructor (see below). In most cases, this is
  `noexcept(true)`. Thus a throwing destructor must be explicitly declared
  `noexcept(false)`.** — (since C++11)
- **requires-clause** — (since C++20) requires-clause that declares the
  associated constraints for the prospective destructor, which must be satisfied
  in order for the prospective destructor to be selected as the destructor

### Explanation

The destructor is called whenever an object's lifetime ends, which includes

- program termination, for objects with static storage duration

- thread exit, for objects with thread-local storage duration
*(since C++11)*

- end of scope, for objects with automatic storage duration and for temporaries
  whose life was extended by binding to a reference
- delete-expression, for objects with dynamic storage duration
- end of the full expression, for nameless temporaries
- stack unwinding, for objects with automatic storage duration when an exception
  escapes their block, uncaught.

The destructor may also be called directly, e.g. to destroy an object that was
constructed using placement-new or through an allocator member function such as
`std::allocator::destroy()`, to destroy an object that was constructed through
the allocator. Note that calling a destructor directly for an ordinary object,
such as a local variable, invokes undefined behavior when the destructor is
called again, at the end of scope.

In generic contexts, the destructor call syntax can be used with an object of
non-class type; this is known as pseudo-destructor call: see member access
operator.

### Prospective destructor
A class may have one or more prospective destructors, one of which is selected
as the destructor for the class.
In order to determine which prospective destructor is the destructor, at the end
of the definition of the class, overload resolution is performed among
prospective destructors declared in the class with an empty argument list. If
the overload resolution fails, the program is ill-formed. Destructor selection
does not odr-use the selected destructor, and the selected destructor may be
deleted.
All prospective destructors are special member functions. If no user-declared
prospective destructor is provided for class `T`, the compiler will always
declare one (see below), and the implicitly declared prospective destructor is
also the destructor for `T`.
*(since C++20)*

### Implicitly-declared destructor

If no user-declared prospective(since C++20) destructor is provided for a class
type, the compiler will always declare a destructor as an inline public member
of its class.

As with any implicitly-declared special member function, the exception
specification of the implicitly-declared destructor is non-throwing unless the
destructor of any potentially-constructed base or member is
potentially-throwing(since C++17)implicit definition would directly invoke a
function with a different exception specification(until C++17). In practice,
implicit destructors are noexcept unless the class is "poisoned" by a base or
member whose destructor is `noexcept(false)`.

### Implicitly-defined destructor

If an implicitly-declared destructor is not deleted, it is implicitly defined
(that is, a function body is generated and compiled) by the compiler when it is
odr-used. This implicitly-defined destructor has an empty body.

If this satisfies the requirements of a constexpr destructor(until
C++23)constexpr function(since C++23), the generated destructor is constexpr.
*(since C++20)*

### Deleted destructor

The implicitly-declared or explicitly-defaulted destructor for class `T` is
undefined(until C++11)defined as deleted(since C++11) if any of the following
conditions is satisfied:

- `T` has a potentially constructed subobject of class type `M` (or possibly
  multi-dimensional array thereof) such that `M` has a destructor that
- The destructor is virtual and the lookup for the deallocation function results
  in

An explicitly-defaulted prospective destructor for `T` is defined as deleted if
it is not the destructor for `T`.
*(since C++20)*

### Trivial destructor

The destructor for class `T` is trivial if all of the following is true:

- The destructor is not user-provided (meaning, it is either implicitly
  declared, or explicitly defined as defaulted on its first declaration).
- The destructor is not virtual (that is, the base class destructor is not
  virtual).
- All direct base classes have trivial destructors.
- All non-static data members of class type (or array of class type) have
  trivial destructors.

A trivial destructor is a destructor that performs no action. Objects with
trivial destructors don't require a delete-expression and may be disposed of by
simply deallocating their storage. All data types compatible with the C language
(POD types) are trivially destructible.

### Destruction sequence

For both user-defined or implicitly-defined destructors, after executing the
body of the destructor and destroying any automatic objects allocated within the
body, the compiler calls the destructors for all non-static non-variant data
members of the class, in reverse order of declaration, then it calls the
destructors of all direct non-virtual base classes in reverse order of
construction (which in turn call the destructors of their members and their base
classes, etc), and then, if this object is of most-derived class, it calls the
destructors of all virtual bases.

Even when the destructor is called directly (e.g. `obj.~Foo();`), the return
statement in `~Foo()` does not return control to the caller immediately: it
calls all those member and base destructors first.

### Virtual destructors

Deleting an object through pointer to base invokes undefined behavior unless the
destructor in the base class is virtual:

```cpp
class Base
{
public:
    virtual ~Base() {}
};

class Derived : public Base {};

Base* b = new Derived;
delete b; // safe
```

A common guideline is that a destructor for a base class must be either public
and virtual or protected and nonvirtual.

### Pure virtual destructors

A prospective(since C++20) destructor may be declared pure virtual, for example
in a base class which needs to be made abstract, but has no other suitable
functions that could be declared pure virtual. A pure virtual destructor must
have a definition, since all base class destructors are always called when the
derived class is destroyed:

```cpp
class AbstractBase
{
public:
    virtual ~AbstractBase() = 0;
};
AbstractBase::~AbstractBase() {}

class Derived : public AbstractBase {};

// AbstractBase obj; // compiler error
Derived obj;         // OK
```

### Exceptions

As any other function, a destructor may terminate by throwing an exception (this
usually requires it to be explicitly declared `noexcept(false)`)(since C++11),
however if this destructor happens to be called during stack unwinding,
`std::terminate` is called instead.

Although `std::uncaught_exceptions` may sometimes be used to detect stack
unwinding in progress, it is generally considered bad practice to allow any
destructor to terminate by throwing an exception. This functionality is
nevertheless used by some libraries, such as SOCI and Galera 3, which rely on
the ability of the destructors of nameless temporaries to throw exceptions at
the end of the full expression that constructs the temporary.

`std::experimental::scope_success` in Library fundamental TS v3 may have a
potentially-throwing destructor, which throws an exception when the scope is
exited normally and the exit function throws an exception.

### Example

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct A
{
    int i;

    A(int num) : i(num)
    {
        std::cout << "ctor a" << i << '\n';
    }

    ~A()
    {
        std::cout << "dtor a" << i << '\n';
    }
};

A a0(0);

int main()
{
    A a1(1);
    A* p;

    { // nested scope
        A a2(2);
        p = new A(3);
    } // a2 out of scope

    delete p; // calls the destructor of a3
}
```

Output:

```text
ctor a0
ctor a1
ctor a2
ctor a3
dtor a2
dtor a3
dtor a1
dtor a0
```

### Defect reports

The following behavior-changing defect reports were applied retroactively to
previously published C++ standards.

  DR | Applied to | Behavior as published | Correct behavior
  CWG 193 | C++98 | whether automatic objects in a destructor are destroyed
      before or after the destruction of the class's base and member subobjects
      was unspecified | they are destroyed before destroying those subobjects
  CWG 344 | C++98 | the declarator syntax of destructor was defective (had the
      same problem as CWG issue 194 and CWG issue 263 | changed the syntax to a
      specialized function declarator syntax
  CWG 1241 | C++98 | static members might be destroyed right after destructor
      execution | only destroy non- static members
  CWG 1353 | C++98 | the conditions where implicitly-declared destructors are
      undefined did not consider multi-dimensional array types | consider these
      types
  CWG 2180 | C++98 | a destructor for class `X` calls the destructors for X's
      virtual direct base classes | those destructors are not called

### See also

- copy elision
- `new`
- `delete`

---
*Source: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/destructor*
